---
layout: page
permalink: /teaching/ssds-2023
title: Development Strategies 2023
nav: false
nav_order: 4
---

-   TOC {:toc}

# 1 General Information

The focus of the course is close reading and re-analysis of emerging
research in the political economy of development, broadly construed. The
focus is on well identified research whether based on experimental or
observational data. It is intended for graduate students who already
have strong analytic skills. Auditors are welcome as long as they put in
the work—that is, sign up to be on a replication team.

The overall structure is that an external “speaker” comes to discuss new
or in-progress research. The speaker does not actually present the work
however; instead they share their papers, data and code in advance with
the class and a “replication team” puts together a detailed discussion
of the work, usually involving a replication of core results and a
re-analysis or extension of the main findings.

Note this course will be taught in April 2023 with speaker sessions on
3, 4,5,6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19 April and a final set of sessions
to discuss *your* designs on 20 April. Most days we will try to have a
lunch or a dinner with the visiting speaker.

# 2 Expectations

## 2.1 Reading

The reading loads are not especially heavy; typically the speaker will
provide 1 or 2 readings that give a sense of their research agenda. You
should read these carefully. You should also look at the data
<em>whether or not you are on the “rep” team.</em> There is no point
coming to the class unprepared. My thoughts on
<a href="https://macartan.github.io/teaching/how-to-read" rel="nofollow">reading</a>
and
<a href="https://macartan.github.io/teaching/how-to-critique" rel="nofollow">discussanting</a>.
See also [chapter in declare design
book](https://book.declaredesign.org/integration.html#reanalysis)

## 2.2 Repping

Guest speakers will be asked to share data in advance, and students are
encouraged to replicate results and submit the results to robustness
checks before each class.

1.  Every registered student will be expected to write a one-page
    response paper in advance of the talk each day. This is due into the
    class dropbox by midnight the day before. If you are presenting in a
    given day this is not required.

2.  A “rep” team (likely of two students) will be assigned a formal role
    as discussants and prepare oral and written commentary for the guest
    speaker. You should expect to be on one rep team each week.

Key elements of this are:

-   Be in touch with authors and be sure you have the data, papers, and
    all you need at least a week in advance

-   Make sure you can make sense of the data and run a basic
    replication.

-   When you have a feel of things jot down a brief pre-replication
    plan. What do you plan to look at? What do you expect to find?
    Archive this on dropbox.

-   Then there are two ways to expand the analysis;

    -   One is to check for robustness. How much do things depend on the
        particular models or measurements?
    -   The second is to go more deeply into the logic of the
        explanation. This might sometimes require assembling more data,
        constructing new tests and so on.
    -   Plan on generating a small “pre-replication plan” and posting it
        to Git before engaging in reanalysis

-   Generate a presentation that

    -   presents the paper in general
    -   goes through the results and replication and
    -   goes through robustness and extensions
    -   does all this in quorto or rmarkdown so that speaker has content
        and code in a single file (great reference:
        <https://quarto.org/docs/presentations/revealjs/>)

-   *contribute* your replication to a class package (I will share notes
    on how to do this)

-   I urge you also to try to use `DeclareDesgin` to formally
    characterize the research design in abstract terms and assess its
    properties

    -   Note that while we focus a lot on statistical replication and
        re-analysis there are many sides to a paper. Your presentation
        <strong>should not shy from discussing more fundamental
        conceptual or interpretational issues</strong> as appropriate.

## 2.3 Writing

You will be expected to write a research design containing (i) a
theoretical argument or motivation, (ii) a proposed empirical test of
that argument (iii) a formal design object and (iv) a discussion of
policy prescriptions that might result from the argument.

# 3 The Speakers

We have a fantastic lineup of speakers all from nearby and most recent
CU grads. They are all doing inspiring work:

Dates for speakers will be added when we have them.

-   Kate Baldwin, Yale
-   Guy Grossman, Penn
-   Sarah Khan, Yale
-   Salma Moussa, Yale
-   Summer Lindsay, Rutgers
-   Gwyneth McClendon, NYU
-   Laura Paler, American
-   Cyrus Samii, NYU
-   Ken Scheve, Yale
-   Tara Slough, NYU

## 3.1 The Rules

It is a very unusual thing for speakers to come and share data on
unpublished work. It makes for terrific feedback and learning, but can
also bring some risks to speakers. This cannot be thought of as a public
presentation of research in the usual way and different rules apply. In
particular:

-   If a speaker requests that data not be shared outside the group, or
    perhaps even outside the replication team, this has to be adhered to
    strictly on pain of permanent ostracism.
-   Any new findings from the analyses do not belong to the class or the
    students that engaged in the replication. You are working with the
    data for training purposes not for research purposes; you might see
    amazing patterns in the data but they <em>don’t</em> belong to you.
-   Any public commentary has to be bland at best. If you <em>have</em>
    to tweet or related after sessions, these should be of no cause for
    embarrassment for speakers.

# 4 Workflow and Tools

We are going to be pretty hardcore about the workflow and using a set of
very recent research tools to make sure all the work in the class is
transparent and replicable.

The main tools that we will employ are:

-   GitHub - for collaborating on code, publishing replications and
    raising issues
-   Drive - for sharing data with one another that cannot be put on
    dropbox
-   R - for conducting statistical analysis and authoring documents in…
-   rmarkdown (or quorto)- for authoring replications and pages on
    GitHub

I plan also to develop an `R` package structure so that, if authors give
permission, the entire class can be shared as a kind of model
replication package.
